---
layout: documents
categories: 
  - "Spectrum48 BASIC"
title:  "The ZX Printer"
alias: basic-ch21
seqno: 220
selector: spectrum
permalink: "spectrum/basic-ch21"
---

# CHAPTER 21: The ZX printer

## Summary

- **LPRINT**, **LLIST**, **COPY**

Note: None of these statements is standard BASIC, although **LPRINT** is used by some other computers.

If you have a ZX printer, you will have some operating instructions with it. This chapter covers the BASIC statements needed to make it work.

The first two, **LPRINT** and **LLIST**, are just like **PRINT** and **LIST**, except that they use the printer instead of the television. (The L is an historical accident. When BASIC was invented it usually used an electric typewriter instead of a television, so **PRINT** really did mean print. If you wanted masses of output you would use a very fast line printer attached to the computer, and an **LPRINT** statement meaning 'Line printer **PRINT**'.)

Try this program for example.

```
10 LPRINT "This program".'
20 LLIST
30 LPRINT '"prints out the character set."'
40 FOR n=32 TO 255
50 LPRINT CHR$ n;
60 NEXT n
```

The third statement, **COPY**, prints out a copy of the television screen. For instance, type **LIST** to get a listing on the screen of the program above, and
type
 
**COPY**

Note that **COPY** doesn't work with one of the listings that the computer puts up automatically, because that is cleared whenever a command is obeyed. You must
either use **LIST** first, or use **LLIST** and forget about **COPY**.

You can always stop the printer when it is running by pressing the **BREAK** key (**CAPS SHIFT** and **SPACE**).

If you execute these statements without the printer attached, it should lose all the output and carry on with the next statement.

Try this:

```
10 FOR n=31 TO 3 STEP-1
20 PRINT AT 31-n,n; CHRS (**CODE** "3"+n);
30 NEXT n
```

You will see a pattern of characters working down diagonally from the top right-hand corner until it reaches the bottom of the screen, when the program
asks if you want to scroll.

Now change **AT** 31-n,n in line 20 to **TAB** n. The program will have exactly the same effect as before.

 Now change **PRINT** in line 20 to **LPRINT**. This time there will be no scroll?, which should not occur with the printer, and the pattern will carry straight on with the letters F to O.

Now change **TAB** n to **AT** 31-n,n still using **LPRINT**. This time you will get just a single line of symbols. The reason for the difference is that the output from **PRINT** is not printed straight away, but arranges in a buffer store a picture one line long of what the computer will send to the printer when it gets round to it. The printing takes place

_(i)_ when the buffer is full,  
_(ii)_ after an **LPRINT** statement that does not end in a comma or semicolon,  
_(iii)_ when a comma, apostrophe or **TAB** item requires a new line, or  
_(iv)_ at the end of a program, if there is anything left unprinted.  
 
(iii) explains why our program with **TAB** works the way it does. As for **AT**, the
line number is ignored and the **LPRINT** position (like the **PRINT** position, but for
the printer instead of the television) is changed to the column number. An **AT**
item can never cause a line to be sent to the printer.

## Exercise

1 . Make a printed graph of **SIN** by running the program in Chapter 17 and then using **COPY**.
