---
layout: documents
categories: 
  - "Spectrum48 BASIC"
title:  "Conditions"
alias: basic-ch13
seqno: 140
selector: spectrum
permalink: "spectrum/basic-ch13"
---

# CHAPTER 13: Conditions

## Summary

- **AND, OR**
- **NOT**

We saw in Chapter 3 how an **IF** statement takes the form

**IF** condition **THEN** . . .

The conditions there were the relations (=, \<, \>, \<=, \>= and \<\>), which compare two numbers or two strings. You can also combine several of these, using
the logical operations, **AND**, **OR** and **NOT**.

One relation **AND** another relation is true whenever both relations are true, so you could have a line like:

**IF a$="yes" AND x>0 THEN PRINT x**

in which x only gets printed if a$=''yes" and x\>0. The BASIC here is so close to English that it hardly seems worth spelling out the:details. As in English,
you can join lots of relations together with **AND**, and then the whole lot is true if all the individual relations are.

One relation **OR** another is true whenever at least one of the two relations is true. (Remember that it is still true if both the relations are true; this is
something that English doesn't always imply.)

The **NOT** relationship turns things upside down. The **NOT** relation is true whenever the relation is false, and false whenever it is true!

Logical expressions can be made with relations and **AND**, **OR** and **NOT**, just as numerical expressions can be made with numbers and +, - and so on; you can even put them in brackets if necessary. They have priorities in the same way as the usual operations +, -, *, / and ­, do: **OR** has the lowest priority, then **AND**, then **NOT**, then the relations, and the usual operations.

**NOT** is really a function, with an argument and a result, but its priority is much lower than that of other functions. Therefore its argument does not need
brackets unless it contains **AND** or **OR** (or both). **NOT** a=b means the same as **NOT** (a=b) (and the same as a<>b, of course).

<> is the negation of = in the sense that it is true if, and only if, = is false. In other words,

**a<>b** is the same as **NOT a=b**

and also

**NOT a<>b** is the same as **a=b**

Persuade yourself that >= and <= are the negations of < and > respectively: thus you can always get rid of **NOT** from in front of a relation by changing the
relation.

Also,

**NOT** (a first logical expression **AND** a second)

is the same as

**NOT** (the first) **OR NOT** (the second)

and

**NOT** (a first logical expression **OR** a second)

is the same as

**NOT** (the first) **AND NOT** (the second).

Using this you can work **NOT**s through brackets until eventually they are all applied to relations, and then you can get rid of them. Logically speaking, **NOT** is unnecessary, although you might still find that using it makes a program clearer.

The following section is quite complicated, and can be skipped by the fainthearted!

Try

```
PRINT 1=2,1 < >2
```

which you might expect to give a syntax error. In fact, as far as the computer is concerned, there is no such thing as a logical value: instead
it uses ordinary numbers, subject to a few rules.

_(i)_: =, <, >, <=, >= and <> all give numeric results: 1 for true, and 0 for false. Thus the **PRINT** command above printed 0 for '1=2', which is false, and 1
for '1<>2', which is true.

_(ii)_ In **IF** condition **THEN** . . .

the condition can be actually any numeric expression. If its value is 0, then it counts as false, and any other value lincluding the value of 1 that a true
relation gives) counts as true. Thus the **IF** statement means exactly the same as **IF** condition **<>0 THEN** . . .

_(iii)_: **AND**, **OR** and **NOT** are also number-valued operations.

*x* **AND** *y* has the value {*x* if *y* is true (non-zero) / {0 (false). if *y* is false (zero)

*x* **OR** *y* has the value {1 (true), if *y* is true (non zero) / {*x*, if *y* is false (zero)

**NOT** *x* has the value {0 (false), if *x* is true (non-zero) / {1 (true), if *x* is false (zero)

(Notice that 'true' means 'non-zero' when we're checking a given value, but it means '1' when we're producing a new one.)

Read through the chapter again in the light of this revelation, making sure that it all works.

In the expressions **x AND** y, **x OR** y and **NOT x**, **x** and **y** will usually take the values 0 and 1 for false and true. Work out the ten different combinations (four for **AND**, four for **OR** and two for **NOT**) and check that they do what the chapter leads you to expect them to do.

Try this program:

```
10 INPUT a
20 INPUT b
30 PRINT (a AND a\>=b)+(b AND a\<b)
40 GO TO 10
```

Each time it prints the larger of the two numbers a and b. Convince yourself that you can think of

**x **AND** y**

as meaning

**x** if **y** (else the result is 0)

and of

**x OR y**

as meaning

**x** unless **y** (in which case the result is 1)

An expression using **AND** or **OR** like this is called a conditional expression. An example using **OR** could be

**LET total price=price less tax\*(1.15 OR v$="zero rated")**

Notice how **AND** tends to go with addition (because its default value is 0), and **OR** tends to go with multiplication (because its default value is 1).

You can also make string valued conditional expressions, but only using **AND**.

**x$ AND y** has the value {x$ if y is non-zero / {"" if y is zero

so it means x$ if y (else the empty string).

Try this program, which inputs two strings and puts them in alphabetical order.
 
```
10 INPUT "type in two strings"'a$,b$
20 IF a$\>b$ THEN LET c$=a$: LET a$=b$: LET b$=c$
30 PRINT a$;" ";("\<" AND a$\<b$)+("=" AND a$=b$);" ";b$
40 GO TO 10
```

## Exercise

1. BASIC can sometimes work along different lines from English. Consider, for instance, the English clause 'If *a* doesn't equal *b* or *c*'. How would you
write this in BASIC? The answer is not

**IF A<>B **OR** C**

nor is it

**IF A<>B OR A<>C**
